---
title: Celts and Germans
layout: page
---

The terms 'Keltoi' or 'Celti' were used by Greeks and Romans for the northern
barbarians. At times posing a considerable threat to the Mediterranean
countries, the northern barbarians controlled much of western and central
Europe. Unfortunately the Celts were an oral tradition and left no literature,
with only traces remaining in inscriptions, the names of places and persons,
and archaeological evidence. Most impressive of these archaeological finds
were the lavishly decorated Celtic grave sites. These grave sites showed that
the Celts did in fact trade with the Romans and Greeks but they also produced
their own works of art which had stark individuality.

The most impressive of studies we have of the Celtic peoples in early times was
conducted by a Posidonius (c. 135 BCE - c. 51 BCE), a Syrian Greek. Of note in
the oft quoted writings of himself and later historians was the sheer reckless
courage and ferocity of the Celts in battle. There is also general agreement
that the Celts enjoyed fine clothes, ornaments, and elaborate hairstyles.
Feasting, drinking, and magnificent, impulsive hospitality were a staple part
of life. Complimenting this were less endearing qualities such as vanity and
boastfulness. Posidonius and his later contemporaries were particularly
fascinated by the learnings and practices of the druids who were by some
considered natural philosophers and others as savage priests.

The Germanic peoples, from the Roman 'Germani' (meaning 'children of the same
parent'), lived in the area which the Romans termed 'Germania.' Germania was
enclosed by the Rhine, the Vistula, and the Danube. Julius Caesar in the first
century BCE said that the Germans were settled to the east of the Rhine and the
Celts the other side, though this was likely an oversimplification of a
confused situation. Germani seems to have originally been a tribal name,
possibly even the name of a Celtic tribe. In the first century CE, Tacitus in
his _On the Origin and Geography of Germania_ (generally known as _Germania_)
praises the warrior ideals and the fierce loyalty of German warriors to their
leaders, while noting when not engaged in battle they spent their time drinking
and boasting. He realised that there we considerable differences amongst the
Germanic tribes and recorded what he could about their religious traditions.
What was emphasised is that the Germans were a warrior society with their later
heroic poetry backing up these claims.

Since their societies were predominantly warrior ones, they had many small
kingdoms and restless war-bands. Their leaders had to justify their authority
by skill, courage, and good fortune in battle. The religion of the Celts and
Germans had to be one suitable for a world of continual challenge and struggle
for survival in a demanding environment. Much of the traditions of these two
cultures that survive have to do with obtaining victory in battle and achieving
good harvests. Skill with words was also valued by these peoples as much as
valour in battle where they delighted in riddles, word-games, intricate poetic
language, and skill in argument.

What can be concluded is that the Celts and Germans had much in common, and
were in touch around the Rhineland in Roman times, in Britain in the fifth
century CE, and in the British Isles in the Viking Age. However, it's evident
that they had conflicts over territory during these times of interaction. It's
often hard to determine from burial customs or archaeological remains whether a
specific tribe was Celtic or German, though their language, art, and mythology
developed differently in the Common Era. Unfortunately the tendency these days
is to consider them as distinct cultures despite the apparent strong links
between their thought-patterns and world-views on which their myths are based
on. Naturally this comes as a result of our views of Celtic and Germanic
traditions coming largely from Ireland and Iceland respectively. Distinct
locations geographically that would subsequently cause their language and
mythology to develop differently. The final conclusion is that the difference
between the Celts and Germans gets blurry when we consider the roots of both
traditions. Therefore with further study parallels should be able to be drawn
between the traditions of the Celts and the Germans.

# Bibliography
* (2017, July 11). _Germania (Church & Brodribb)._ Retrieved from
  https://wikisource.org
* Ellis Davidson, Hilda. (2002). _The Lost Beliefs of Northern Europe._
  Routledge.
