---
title: The Colour of Trolldómr (Magic)
layout: page
---

Trolldómr (Old Norse 'magic, wizardry'), hereafter referred to as simply
'magic,' in a general sense is the ancient art of wisdom and knowledge. It
harkens back to a previous age where wisdom and knowledge were a claim to
authority and considered of divine status. It mostly revolved around the idea
of the unreal, think psyche, becoming the real, think physical. The spoken word
was supremely powerful in Germanic traditions. From oaths and poetry to charms
and spells, should we be weary about what we say or should we be adamant of
putting thought into action?

Trolldómr, seiðr, galdr, at spá are particularly hard to define as they've been
likened to wizardry, witchcraft, spells, and prophecy. Though this loses the
overarching influence of these forms of magic in everyday life. Magic for
example was viewed by some as negative or positive depending on the effect. Not
only that, there's a spectrum of magic ranging from local political strategies
to peasants wanting to know how the year would turn out for them. What we're
trying to convey here is that magic was a way of life, which just like life
comes in many shades of grey, and not simply black and white.

A 'belief in magic' is not necessarily referring to extraordinary supernatural
experience but rather to a system of knowledge and explanations, a science so
to speak, that takes into account that such concepts as the psyche had a major
influence on everyday experience. Seiðr, for example, was not only used to
predict the future but also to gain power over certain situations. What was
manipulation and destruction from one perspective was good advice and healing
from another. Magic primarily dealt with conceptions of a person's abilities to
influence their fellow human being and nature, through innate qualities or
skill, for better or worse. Magic essentially covered a variety of practices
combining abstractions and ideas with ritual. The object of such activities
were perhaps a person, an animal, the landscape, or more abstract ideas like
prosperity or fortune. Given this, it's hard to formally define magic and any
attempt to would lose its essence. It covers a wide ranging field that
encompasses the ability to influence what is 'real' based on what is not, be
that mind, soul, or spirit.

It is notable that magic that wanted to wrought destruction, sickness, and
misfortune was mostly performed in a clandestine, solitary manner, while magic
that was to wrought creation, health, and fortune was mostly performed in an
open, sociable manner. Magic in this fashion was first of all a means to
explain the hardships of life - be that misfortune, illness, theft, unexpected
death, etc. However, magic also had connotations of ancient learning and
knowledge, it's positive aspect. Therefore it was a means of not only
explaining away circumstances but also of understanding them. To be a
practitioner of magic is to be wise and knowledgeable, and be recognised as
such. People turn to you for their problems and you're expected to use the
state of the art to remedy their problems. In past times this included appeals
to magic, witchcraft, and healing. These days you're more likely to turn to
science, medicine, and technology.

When 'know' or 'knowledge' are used in a Germanic context they have more
sophisticated meanings than prescribed in modern English. Specifically they
imply that this 'knowledge' can be used in a nefarious or wonderful manner.
That is, knowledge can be used and misused depending on the intention of the
knowledgeable. It should be emphasised that magic symbolised the abstract
aspect of knowledge and learning and its practitioners were held to have
extraordinary knowledge and to be great teachers. Knowledge about the past for
example was a means of establishing authority.

With the exception of seiðr, no activity is more closely connected to magic
than the act of carving runes with the aim of cursing or healing. Runes were a
means of telling of people that made use of their magic knowledge. The runic
alphabet wasn't just a means of communication but signified the carver's
special knowledge. The runes were kept for centuries after Christianisation to
write charms, notes, and also prayers. There's no real distinction between
writing runes and singing powerful songs. Of all poets and knowledgeable
characters, *Wōdanaz was considered master of all these potent crafts. His
quest for wisdom and powerful runes is a major theme in mythological
narratives.

Another strong theme in Old Norse literature is that of the spoken word. The
pronouncement of words was recognised to have tremendous influence on everyday
life. The impact of a sentence uttered aloud could never be taken back as if it
had somehow become physical, turning the unreal into the real. Not only does
reality create words, but words create reality. What comes of this is that
prayer and blessings are a powerful means of forging your own reality. To speak
out loud is to provide substance to your deepest worries, concerns, or simply
to give praise to what you have. In older traditions, the words uttered, and
the subsequent healing or destruction, was actually taking place. One could
possibly conclude that poetry and song, or to 'chant' or 'cast spells,' are
magical in and of themselves. Just as a poet could enchant his audience, so a
person with the right insights could use loudly uttered words for protection,
healing, or cursing.

Magic, be it positive or negative, was also related to conceptions of fate.
This task of performing rituals that aim to reveal the future was restricted to
the knowledgeable. Most conceptions of fate, and subsequently fortunes, were
underlined by a person's potential by focusing on the socioeconomic
circumstances of one's birth. Secondary to this were the quality of one's
character, physical strength and agility, and one's skills and talents.
However, the Germanic didn't hold fatalistic beliefs. The act of divination
itself was one of the ways of measuring reality and creating order out of
chaos. The results of divination marked the limits of free will and after a
divination ceremony strategies were discussed for acting within those
limitations. Divination basically revealed the tension between free will and
determinism. On the one hand, the limits are set and it lies within the human
condition to identify them and act within the given space. On the other hand,
choices and consequences over a longer period of time is an important theme in
determining one's fate. Therefore there was a continuous conscious struggle
between the human at an instant making a choice and the web of choices that
determined their past and future, their wyrd and orlæg.

The reasonable conclusion is thus that magic can be found in everyday life
through science, medicine, technology, and the arts. We must put faith in the
wise and knowledgable scientists, doctors, engineers, and artist that turn the
unreal into the real. Even the humble writer turns ideas and abstractions into
reality by putting them on paper, similar in a sense to the old usage of the
runes to carve out great knowledge. This is highlighted by the fact that the
wise professor will profess that he's not certain, but pretty sure, that
because something has happened many times before, it's likely that it'll happen
again. The magic is in this uncertainty. We must put faith in the claims to
authority by the scientist, doctor, engineer, or artist. Those who predict the
weather, heal the ill, have created the internet of all things, and weave
together majestic creations. In this extraordinary knowledge we must trust.
Though this doesn't necessarily limit you from gaining extraordinary knowledge.
Fortunately in this day and age, magic is everywhere. Literacy and musical
ability are high allowing people to create their own poetry and song which
could be likened to 'charms' and 'casting spells.' If one wants an accessible
way to enter the world of magic it's advised that one creates their own charms
and spells to manipulate their fate. This could readily be sought after as
prose, poetry, or song, powerful means of communication. While the austere
beauty of science, medicine, and technology is a wonder to behold, the initiate
may find it easier to connect with prayer and blessings to guide one's fate and
ultimately their destiny.

# Bibliography
* Jolly, Louise Karen, Catherine Raudvere, and Edward Peters. (2002).
  _Witchcraft and Magic in Europe: The Middle Ages._ Continuum International
  Publishing Group.
